Unit 3 Libraries for Python Complete How-To Guide

Anaconda, Jupyter, NumPy, Pandas and Evidence Submission

Assessment 1 - Miniconda and environments

01. Create or confirm the Unit 3 working folder - Use C:\OGBuild\College\Unit 3 - Libraries for python as the project root.

02. Create a project environment - Run conda create --name og-unit3-libraries python=3.11.

03. Activate the environment - Run conda activate og-unit3-libraries before package or notebook work.

04. Install packages - Run conda install jupyter numpy pandas matplotlib seaborn.

05. Update or remove packages - Use conda update package-name or conda remove package-name while the environment is active.

06. Deactivate at the end - Run conda deactivate after the evidence work is finished.

conda create --name og-unit3-libraries python=3.11
conda activate og-unit3-libraries
conda install jupyter numpy pandas matplotlib seaborn
conda update pandas
conda remove seaborn
conda env export > environment.yml
conda deactivate

Assessment 2 - Jupyter Notebook evidence

01. Open the notebook environment - Activate og-unit3-libraries, then start Jupyter Notebook from the Unit 3 folder.

02. Run myfirstjupyternotebook.ipynb - Use it as evidence for markdown cells, code cells and simple Python output.

03. Capture markdown evidence - Screenshot the markdown cell that introduces the notebook task.

04. Capture code evidence - Screenshot code cells and outputs such as Hello, AI World and a + b.

05. Organise screenshots - Place screenshots into the OG Web.site evidence collection with annotations.

06. Keep source files - Keep .ipynb files beside the DOCX and TXT answer sheets so evidence is traceable.

Assessment 3 - NumPy ndarray evidence

01. Open numpynotebook.ipynb - Use it to show NumPy import, ndarray creation and array properties.

02. Create an ndarray - Run the cells that create arrays with shape and dtype.

03. Save and load arrays - Run np.savetxt and np.loadtxt cells and capture the file/output evidence.

04. Open ndarraymanipulation.ipynb - Use it for array arithmetic, slicing, reshaping and splitting.

05. Embed comments in code - For Q3, include comments directly inside the code explaining each operation.

06. Capture output - Screenshot code and printed output together, not cropped output alone.

import numpy as np  # Import NumPy for ndarray work.
arr = np.array([[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]])  # Create a 2x3 ndarray.
print(arr.shape)  # Show the array shape for evidence.
print(arr[:, 1])  # Slice the second column from all rows.
reshaped = arr.reshape(3, 2)  # Reshape without changing values.
print(reshaped)  # Print reshaped output for screenshot evidence.

Assessment 4 - Pandas Series and DataFrame evidence

01. Open pandasds.ipynb - Use it for Pandas Series creation, access and deletion evidence.

02. Create Series evidence - Show Series from a list, NumPy array and Titanic Age column.

03. Access Series values - Show access by label, position and slicing.

04. Delete Series values - Show drop or slicing to remove values.

05. Open pandasdf.ipynb - Use it for DataFrame evidence with titanic.csv.

06. Create and inspect DataFrame - Show pd.read_csv, head, dtypes and describe.

07. Delete and filter DataFrame data - Show drop(columns=["Cabin"]) and filtering rows by conditions.

Final submission pack workflow

01. Use the TXT files for VLE paste - Paste from the clean TXT answer sheets into the rich text boxes.

02. Keep DOCX as branded record - Use DOCX files for the OG Web.site branded archive.

03. Use screenshots as evidence - Evidence screenshots should show file name, code and output.

04. Do not use superseded drafts - Ignore files marked superseded or moved to archive.

05. Commit only clean files if using GitHub - Commit notebooks, final answers, how-to guide and evidence files only.

Statistical Analysis Addendum
-----------------------------

This addendum opens the statistical-analysis evidence route for Unit 3. It uses statistical_analysis.ipynb and titanic.csv from the active submission folder, with pandasdf.ipynb as the existing DataFrame evidence source.

Open Jupyter Notebook from the ACTIVE - Unit 3 Submission folder, then open statistical_analysis.ipynb. Run the cells in order so the notebook shows the CSV loading, DataFrame shape, first rows, data types, describe output, mean, median, mode, standard deviation, grouped survival rates and missing-value counts.

Save screenshots into Evidence/07 Statistical Analysis. The key screenshots are the notebook open beside titanic.csv, the CSV load output, describe and individual statistics output, grouped survival rates by Sex and Pclass, and missing-value or filtered-data output.

Use the branded statistical-analysis how-to guide for annotation text when placing the screenshots into the SS evidence collection document.
