Unit 3 Libraries for Python Assessment 4 Answer Sheet
Pandas Series, DataFrames and Titanic dataset work

Q1. What is Pandas used for, and what is a Pandas Series?
Target used: developed answer with definition, use, example, advantage and limitation.

Pandas is a Python library used for working with structured data. Structured data means information arranged in rows and columns, such as CSV files, spreadsheets, database exports or tables. Pandas is useful because it gives Python two main data structures, Series and DataFrame, which make it easier to load, inspect, clean, filter, analyse and summarise data. Without Pandas, a learner could still use normal Python lists and dictionaries, but the code would usually be longer and harder to read. Pandas solves that problem by giving clear commands for common data tasks.

Pandas is commonly used when a programmer needs to work with real datasets. For example, in the Unit 3 work, titanic.csv contains passenger information. Pandas can load that file with pd.read_csv, display the first few rows with head(), check the column types with dtypes, and create summary statistics with describe(). These commands help the programmer understand the dataset before changing it. This is important because using a dataset without checking its structure can lead to mistakes.

A Pandas Series is a one-dimensional labelled data structure. It is like a single column of data with an index. The index can be numbers such as 0, 1 and 2, or labels such as names, dates or categories. A Series is useful when I need to store and work with one set of related values. For example, the Age column from titanic.csv can be treated as a Series because it contains one column of passenger ages. This means I can access values, filter them, calculate averages or use the Series as part of a larger DataFrame.

In Unit 3, pandasds.ipynb supports this work because it can show Series examples from a Python list, a NumPy array and a Titanic dataset column. A simple code example is:

import pandas as pd
ages = pd.Series([22, 38, 26], name="Age")
print(ages)

This creates a Series called ages. The output would show each value with an index. The advantage of using a Series is that the data has structure and labels, so it is easier to inspect and manipulate than a plain list. A limitation is that a Series only represents one dimension of data. If I need rows and multiple columns together, a DataFrame is more suitable. This is why Pandas uses both Series and DataFrames for practical data work.

Q2. How can Series elements be created, accessed and deleted?
Target used: developed answer with commands for create, access and delete.

Series elements can be created by building a Pandas Series from existing data. The data might come from a Python list, a dictionary, a NumPy array or a column in a DataFrame. A list is useful when the values are simple and ordered. A dictionary is useful when I want labels attached to values. A NumPy array is useful when the data has come from numerical processing. A DataFrame column is useful when extracting one column from a larger dataset.

A basic Series can be created with:

import pandas as pd
scores = pd.Series([80, 72, 91], index=["A", "B", "C"])

This creates three values and gives them labels. The labels are useful because they make the Series easier to access and understand. A Series can also be created from a NumPy array:

import numpy as np
values = np.array([10, 20, 30])
series_values = pd.Series(values)

In the Unit 3 Titanic work, a Series can also come from a DataFrame column. For example:

titanic_df = pd.read_csv("titanic.csv")
age_series = titanic_df["Age"]

This extracts the Age column as a Series. That is useful because it lets me analyse one column separately from the full table.

Series elements can be accessed by label, position or slicing. If the Series has labels A, B and C, scores["A"] returns the value with label A. Position-based access can be done with iloc, such as scores.iloc[0], which returns the first value. Slicing can return more than one value, for example scores.iloc[0:2] returns the first two values. Using labels makes the code readable, while iloc is useful when the position is more important than the label.

Series elements can be deleted with the drop method. For example:

updated_scores = scores.drop("B")

This returns a new Series without the value labelled B. Pandas often returns a changed copy rather than changing the original object directly, which is safer because it reduces accidental data loss. If I wanted to permanently overwrite the variable, I would assign the result back to scores:

scores = scores.drop("B")

The advantage of these Series operations is that they make single-column data easy to manage. I can create the Series, retrieve exact values and remove values that are not needed. A limitation is that deleting data should be done carefully because removed values may affect later calculations. In assessment evidence, I would show the Series before and after the operation so the change is clear.

Q3. What is a DataFrame, and how can DataFrame data be created, accessed, deleted and filtered?
Target used: developed answer with Titanic CSV examples and practical commands.

A Pandas DataFrame is a two-dimensional labelled data structure. It is similar to a table because it has rows and columns. Each column in a DataFrame is a Series, so a DataFrame can be understood as a collection of related Series objects placed together. DataFrames are useful when working with datasets because they can store mixed types of data, such as numbers, text and categories. This makes them suitable for CSV files like titanic.csv, where each row represents a passenger and each column stores information such as age, sex, passenger class and survival status.

A DataFrame can be created manually from a dictionary, but in Unit 3 the more realistic method is loading a CSV file. For example:

import pandas as pd
titanic_df = pd.read_csv("titanic.csv")

This reads the Titanic CSV file and stores it in a DataFrame called titanic_df. This is better than manually typing the data because it uses the real project dataset. After loading the data, the first check should be inspection. Useful commands include:

titanic_df.head()
titanic_df.dtypes
titanic_df.describe()

head() shows the first rows, dtypes shows each column's data type, and describe() gives summary statistics for numeric columns. These commands help me understand the data before changing it. This matters because the wrong data type, missing values or unexpected columns can affect the results.

DataFrame data can be accessed by selecting columns, rows or conditions. For example, titanic_df["Age"] selects the Age column as a Series. titanic_df[["Age", "Survived"]] selects more than one column. Rows can be selected with iloc for position-based access, such as titanic_df.iloc[0] for the first row. Conditional filtering is also important. For example:

young_survivors = titanic_df[(titanic_df["Age"] < 5) & (titanic_df["Survived"] == 1)]

This creates a filtered DataFrame showing passengers under age five who survived. Filtering is useful because it lets me ask more focused questions about the data instead of looking at every row at once.

DataFrame data can be deleted with drop. For example:

titanic_no_cabin = titanic_df.drop(columns=["Cabin"])

This creates a version of the DataFrame without the Cabin column. This may be useful because the Cabin column often contains missing values in Titanic datasets. Rows can also be dropped if they are incomplete or not needed, but this should be done carefully because removing data can change the analysis. A safe approach is to create a new variable, such as titanic_no_cabin, instead of overwriting the original DataFrame immediately.

The advantage of DataFrames is that they make real dataset work much easier. They allow loading, viewing, filtering, cleaning and summarising data with clear commands. The limitation is that a DataFrame can still give misleading results if the data contains missing values, incorrect types or misunderstood categories. For assessment evidence, I would show the CSV being loaded, the DataFrame being inspected, and before-and-after outputs for deletion or filtering so the practical work is clear.
